TITLE:

Author: Collin Sager
Section: CSCI200A Summer 2024
Project Title: Asteroids Game


PROBLEM DESCRIPTION:

This project will be a simple implementation of the popular arcade game, “Asteroids”, in which a player controls a spaceship in a 2D field that can navigate around and dodge, shoot at, and destroy moving asteroids to gain points. The player starts with 3 lives and will lose one if they contact an asteroid. The goal is to maximize score and get their name displayed on the high score board (and to have fun)! 


PROGRAM DOCUMENTATION:

This program is run by using the included makefile to compile the source files with SFML, then running the executable file that is produced (asteroids.exe). 

The program is written primarily in style of Object-Oriented Programming, with a single "master-loop" from which all game objects are called and modified.  To modify/extend the program, one should find the master loop within Game::go() and all of the other classes that are used (Asteroids, Bullets, Game, GameDisplay, Kinematics, and Spaceship). Descriptions of these classes are located in the CLASS DESCRIPTION section. Additionally, there is a constants.h file that allows many behaviors in the game to be edited from a single screen, and an XYData struct that allows the program to store any data with x-dimension and y-dimension elements in a single variable.

Additional features that would be implemented with more time are sounds, additional controls (restart game from within game, pause, clear high scores), and flying saucers which would intermittently attack user (like in the real game). Sounds would be simple to implement using the SFML library, and additional controls would be added through modifications to Game::processUserInput().  The flying saucers would be more complex and would involve defining another class, and programming the behavior of the saucers.  They would spawn at random intervals, have defined paths with random changes to the path, and would shoot bullets at or near the spaceship. This program also runs a bit differently on different devices, and bugs sometimes appear on devices other than the one it was developed on.  With more time, I would want to figure out why bugs appear on other computers and fix them.

There were many minor changes from the original proposal due to writing the proposal before learning how to use the SFML library. The program still very much follows the spirit of the proposal, but details needed to be adjusted to fit how the library works.  The biggest change from the proposal was not including flying saucers in the game due to limited time to implement the game. Scoring was also custom defined, and the number of asteroids per level is determined mathematically and continues increasing every level, rather than capping at 11.  This change was made because the levels needed to keep getting harder to make up for the lack of enemy flying saucers.



CLASS DESCRIPTION:

The classes created in this program were Game, Game Display, Kinematics, Asteroids, Bullets, and Spaceship. This program is complex (relative to others built in class), so encapsulation was critical to keep the program organized and extendable. The objects were organized based on how they might exist in the "real world".  A game has attributes and behaviors a game has, an asteroid has attributes and behaviors that an asteroid has.  Brief descriptions of the classes are below:

1. Game: This is the central object from which all game functions are called.  The game class has attributes like score, lives, levels, and control states, as well as behaviors like go ("master loop" that performs all major game functions), process input, shoot, test for object collisions, and start levels.

2. GameDisplay: This class abstracts out what is displayed during each phase of the game (home screen, gameplay, game over screen). It is primarily composed of functions that display the non-moving objects within the game (titles, descriptions, score/life/level displays, high scores).

3. Kinematics: This is the base class for all moving objects in the game. It contains data like x/y position, x/y velocity, x/y acceleration, and rotation.  It also defines how the position, velocity, and acceleration interact with each other, and is applied to all derived objects.

4. Asteroids: Derived from Kinematics - Implements (spawns, defines properties of) and draws all large, medium and small asteroids. Contains unique asteroid behavior such as spawning at random locations on screen with random velocity (within bounds).

5. Bullets: derived from Kinematics - Implements, draws, and controls all bullet objects shot from spaceship.  Contains unique bullet behavior such as keeping track of how long bullets have been on screen so they can be removed once they hit their “time limit”.

6. Spaceship: derived from Kinematics - Implements, draws, and controls spaceship which is piloted by user.  Contains unique spaceship behavior such as constantly rotating to point at mouse pointer so player can aim when shooting.

Using these classes was critical to construct a framework from within the game could be built, extended, and run. If another programmer wants to add features to the game, they can edit existing classes as needed or define whole new classes for new objects they may want to add (such as flying saucers).  Without these classes, the program would have to be written in one code block which would be very hard to follow and extend.


LIST DATA STRUCTURE:

In this game, there were often multiple instances of a single type of object (asteroids and bullets). Vectors of objects were used because it made it very simple to perform actions on all objects of the same type at once. For example, for objects to look like they are moving, they need to have a new position on screen for each frame of the game, and the new position must be in accordance with the defined physics.  Lists made it simple to loop over all objects of a certain type, call for them to update their kinematic elements, and then call them to draw themselves to the next frame.

Another use of vectors was displaying names and high scores at the end of the game. Vectors of strings and ints were used to arrange the names and scores so they could be displayed.


FILE I/O:

In order to keep track of scores over multiple instances of the program being run, memory external to the game program was needed. This memory was a file called scores.txt. After every game, the user enters their name, and their name/score is written to the file in a two column format. Then, the contents of the file is read into two lists, one for names and one for scores. They are then sorted greatest to least score, and the first 10 scores (the top 10) are displayed on the game over screen. Without this external file, the only scores that could be displayed would be those that were generated within a single execution of the program, which likely wouldn’t be very many scores. With the file, scores and names can be accumulated over a long period of time.


REFLECTIONS:

The biggest learning from this game was the importance of designing for extension. In many of the assignments, the class framework was provided, but in this case I started completley from scratch and had to go through the design myself. When I first began development, it took far longer than expected to display anything on screen because so much time was invested thinking about how to arrange all of the mechanics such that the program was simple to understand and modify.  Ultimately, it was critical that there was one "master loop" where each iteration of the loop corresponded to one frame of the game, and all tasks performed to run the game were called from that loop.  It was important to abstract as much as possible out of this loop so that it is simple to interpret how the game works.

Another learning is that refactoring code is important.  When a new feature is built, the focus is on making sure just that feature works and often times it is built from a temporary location out of convenience. In the development of this program, these temporary locations were not always updated to somewhere more organized, and the program began getting cluttered. Taking time to reorganize new features every so often ensures the program remains organized and can continue to grow sustainably.


